---
title: "Project Introduction"
excerpt: A brief introduction of the background and motivation for this project.
tags:
  - gsoc
sticky: 100
date: 2022-05-29 19:59:00
updated: 2022-05-29 19:59:00
banner_img: /img/gsoc.png
banner_img_height: 30
hide: true
---

## Abstract

Mass spectrometry (MS) is a popular method in proteomics, metabolomics and protein interaction analysis. OpenMS is one of the most widely acknowledged tools in computational MS analysis, without which many exciting scientific breakthroughs would not be possible. With the development of mass spectrometers with high resolution and sensitivity, the amount and size of data generated by mass spectrometry has been increasing rapidly. The previously established data format, mzML, which is in essence an XML file, cannot be efficiently stored or accessed when the file size is huge. In response to the need of a space- and time-efficient data format to store MS data, a new data format mzMLb has been introduced. It adopts the hierarchical HDF5 format which allows the application of BLOSC compression filters to gain a huge compression rate with splendid IO performance. OpenMS currently does not support this file format as an input.

This proposal aims to implement an IO module for mzMLb files for OpenMS, which provides various compression filters including the most efficient BLOSC filter and customizable chunk size plus other options. The IO module will also allow on-demand loading of data from disk.

## Benefits to the Community

OpenMS is one of the most famous open source mass spectrometry analysis tools. Implementing support for efficient data format will help every scientist who uses OpenMS taking advantage of the fast and reliable data format, consequently enabling mass spectrometry analysis at an even larger scale.

The authors who proposed this format have only implemented an IO module for a specific proteomics tool on an outdated branch that hasn’t been actively maintained since two years ago. OpenMS, however, is under active development and has a wide user group. Adopting such improvement will benefit the scientific community at a larger scale.

## Useful links

* [Project Idea on the GSoC 2022 page of Open Bioinformatics Foundation's website](https://www.open-bio.org/events/gsoc/gsoc-project-ideas/#openms-data-format)
* [Project details on GSoC's official website](https://summerofcode.withgoogle.com/programs/2022/projects/XuTQcndE)
